---
layout: article
title: Cookoo Web
keywords: "Go, web, framework, context, http, www, html"
description: "Learn how to build a simple web app with Cookoo."
permalink: tutorial/web/
---
# Tutorial: Building A Web Application

In this short tutorial we will learn how to build a simple Web server with Cookoo.

While you can build your own Cookoo-based web server, the project comes with all of the basics out of the box. Usually, that's all you need.

Let's start with a simple "Hello World" server:

```go
package main

import (
	"github.com/Masterminds/cookoo"
	"github.com/Masterminds/cookoo/web"
)

func main() {
	registry, router, cxt := cookoo.Cookoo()

	registry.Route("GET /", "The Homepage").
		Does(web.Flush, "out").
		Using("contentType").WithDefault("text/plain").
		Using("content").WithDefault("Hello World")

	web.Serve(registry, router, cxt)
}
```

The above is a very simple (but functional) web server. It listens only for `GET` requests on the root (`/`) URL for this server. And it answers with a plain text document containing only the string `Hello World`.

Here's how it works.

## The imports

Above, we import two packages:

* github.com/Masterminds/cookoo: This contains the Cookoo core, and pretty much all Cookoo apps import this package.
* github.com/Masterminds/cookoo/web: This contains the web helpers for Cookoo, including the web server and a variety of generally useful commands (like `web.Flush`).

## The main Cookoo parts

The first line of the `main()` function calls `cookoo.Cookoo()` to create three things:

* The registry
* The router
* The base context

The *registry* is used to declare routes. With it, we map route patterns to the chain of commands that each route will execute. In our example, we use it to create one route.

The *router* is the piece responsible for executing the routes defined in the registry. In some Cookoo apps, you manually call `router.HandleRequest()`. But with our web server, we'll pass that responsibility on to `web,Serve()`.

The *context* is the general-purpose container for execution data. As a route executes, commands use the context for four things:

* Accessing data about its runtime environment
* Storing data that later commands may use
* Accessing long-term data services (think database connections) as `datasources`
* Logging

In the example above, we don't directly use the context for anything. But behind the scenes, Cookoo is using it to manage information.

## Building the registry

Here's our registry entry:

```go
registry.Route("GET /", "The Homepage").
	Does(web.Flush, "out").
	Using("contentType").WithDefault("text/plain").
	Using("content").WithDefault("Hello World")
```

Just by reading it, we should be able to understand what it is doing:

When we receive a request for "GET /" (which we'll call "The Homepage"), the router `Does` (or executes) `web.Flush` (and we call that step "out") `Using` two different parameters:

* `contentType`, which has a default value of `text/plain`
* `content`, which has a default value of `"Hello World"`

Since we don't specify any way of overriding those defaults, they will always be the case.

So, for example, if we use Curl to access our site, we will get a Hello World response:

```
$ curl localhost:8080/
Hello World
```

## And... the server

The last line of our `main()` function does the obvious:

```go
web.Serve(registry, router, cxt)
```

This starts up a web server, and passes in our registry, router, and context. Under the hood, Cookoo handles the basics of web serving, including basic error handling (404 and 500 errors).

You can run the server on a UNIX-like system with this command:

```
$ go run server.go
```

And whenever you're tired of it, you can kill it with `CTRL-c`.

## One Step Further

Now that we have the basics, let's write our own command and add it to
the existing chain. For simplicity, this command will create a simple
text string.


### The Cookoo Command

Cookoo commands are just functions of the `cookoo.Command` type:

```go 
type Command func(cxt Context, params *Params) (interface{}, Interrupt)
```

So it's a function that takes two things:

* The `cookoo.Context`, which holds data about the current route.
* The `cookoo.Params` instance, which holds the parameters passed into
  this specific command (think of it like `argv` on steriods).

And a command returns two things:

* Some value, which may be `nil`. This will get stored in the context as
  the return value for the command.
* A `cookoo.Interrupt` if you want to interrupt the current route. This
  can be one of several things, including...
  - An `error`, `cookoo.FatalError`, or `cookoo.RecoverableError`. The
    first two will halt the executio of the route and report the error.
    The third will report the error, but continue executing the route.
  - A `cookoo.Reroute`, which will begin executing a different route.
  - A `cookoo.Stop`, which will simply tell the current route to stop
    and return.

Don't fret over the details. The command we are about to build will show
the basics, and the rest you will pick up as you go.

### Making Our Own

Now we can write a simple command that meets that interface.

As with the rest of Go, you can organize source as you wish. I have
created a new file, which I have named `cmd.go`. And here's what's in
it:

```go
package main

import (
	"github.com/Masterminds/cookoo"
	"time"
	"fmt"
)

// MyMessage builds a simple text message and put it in the context.
func MyMessage(c cookoo.Context, p *cookoo.Params) (interface{}, cookoo.Interrupt) {
	tpl := "Route %s executed on %s"
	now := time.Now().Format("Jan 2, 2006 at 3:04pm (MST)")
	name := c.Get("route.Name", "unknown").(string)
	msg := fmt.Sprintf(tpl, name, now)

	return msg, nil
}

```

Really, all we're doing here is creating a short string that says "Route
NAME exectued on DATE". Nothing fancy. So let's take a look at how it
works.

The first few lines of the function body are generic. We create a string
format (mainly so the code above formats well), and we create a string
indicating today's date/time.

But the third line of the function body illustrates one of the features
of Cookoo:

```go
	name := c.Get("route.Name", "unknown").(string)
```

Recall that `c` is a handle to the `cookoo.Context`. There are a number
of data that Cookoo puts into the context for each run. One such piece
of information is `route.Name`, which is the name of the currently
executing route (e.g. `GET /`). We could also get the description of the
route with `route.Description`.

`Get()` takes the name of a context value as the first param, and a
default value as the second. Since context values are stored as
`interface{}`, you will have to explicitly change the type. that's why
we do `.(string)` at the end.

**Tip**
Cookoo's `Context` and `Params` both follow a convention where there are
both `Get()` and `Has()` methods. `Has()` does not take a default value,
and returns `interface{}, bool`, where the bool indicates whether the
value was found. (That, in turn, allows you to intentionally store `nil`
or default values in the context.)

From there, we just format a string and return the resulting message.
Note that the last line of the function does not return a
`cookoo.Interrupt`.

### Adding The Command

Now we can modify the route that we declared earlier in the article:

```go
	registry.Route("GET /", "The Homepage").
		Does(MyMessage, "msg").
		Does(web.Flush, "out").
		Using("contentType").WithDefault("text/plain").
		Using("content").From("cxt:msg")
```

Notice that we've added `Does(MyMessage, "msg")`. That means that the
first command to be executed during processing will be `MyMessage`, and
that it's return value will be stored in the Context with the name
`msg`.

So the formatted string is generated and then stored in the context. How
do we use it?

Take a look at the second command. We've modified it since our first
example:

```go
		Does(web.Flush, "out").
		Using("contentType").WithDefault("text/plain").
		Using("content").From("cxt:msg") // <-- Ooo!
```

Instead of setting the `content` param to a default message, we tell it
to get its value from `cxt:msg`, which means "Get `msg` from the
context".

**Two Tips**

  1. You can combine `.From().WithDefault()` to achieve the effect of
     trying to get a value from the context, but using a default if
     nothing is found.
  2. You can draw from multiple sources in a single `From()` clause. In
     this case, it will search the sources in the given order:
    `From("cxt:msg path:1 post:foo"` would look for 'msg' in the context,
    the second URL path variable, or the 'foo' value in POSTed form data.

Now if we were to start the server (`go run server.go cmd.go`), we would
get data like this:

```
$ curl localhost:8080/
Route GET / executed on Apr 22, 2014 at 8:45am (MDT)
```

At this point you should have a basic understanding of working with
Cookoo as a web server. Check out some of the other articles here to
learn more.
